Add "Measuring memory usage of Haskell values and patching GHC" post (#22)
mpickering/blog: ide/posts/2020-08-04-measuring-memory-size.md

## Starting out

The library only provides one [module](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-datasize-0.2.2/docs/GHC-DataSize.html) with 3 functions. Of those, I only really needed `recursiveSize`. I set up a thread using the [async](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/async) library to regularly run the `recursiveSize` function on the hashmap in question and print the result, the memory size of the hashmap, to stdout. The code compiled --- a promising sign --- but upon starting ghcide, I was greeted by the following error, and no size measurements.
```
closurePtrs: Cannot handle type SMALL_MUT_ARR_PTRS_FROZEN_CLEAN yet
```
Looking at the `recursiveSize` function showed nothing that could throw this error. I decided to dig a bit deeper at the functions it was calling, namely `closureSize` and `getClosureData` (which came from the `ghc-heap` library). The fact that both of them were calling a primop, `unpackClosure#`, seemed suspicious. I decided to grep for the error in GHC. Sure enough, this is an error message printed by `heap_view_closurePtrs` , a C function in the RTS, which is then used by the `unpackClosure#` primop.

> This function works on (*closures*)[https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/commentary/rts/storage/heap-objects], the objects that GHC's RTS allocates on the heap to represent basically all Haskell values. When called on a haskell value, it inspects its closure's tag, which determines what kind of data the closure is holding (e.g. a Thunk, different kinds of arrays, data constructors, etc.). Based on that it extracts the all the pointers contained in it. Back in haskell-land, `unpackClosure#` returns the objects pointed at by those pointers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function works on [*closures*](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/commentary/rts/storage/heap-objects), the objects that GHC's RTS allocates on the heap to represent basically all Haskell values. When called on a haskell value, it inspects its closure's tag, which determines what kind of data the closure is holding (e.g. a Thunk, different kinds of arrays, data constructors, etc.). Based on that it extracts the all the pointers contained in it. Back in haskell-land, `unpackClosure#` returns the objects pointed at by those pointers.
```

Looking through GHC's git log showed that this function did not support any of the `SMALL_MUT_ARR_PTRS_*` closure types (corresponding to the `SmallArray#` and `SmallMutableArray#` types) until GHC 8.10. The library requires GHC 8.6 but looking at its code it seemed like it should work with a newer GHC. Given that the code is a single file, it seemed simple enough to just copy as-is into ghcide, which I did. Switching to GHC 8.10.1 stopped the error and showed some memory size measurements being printed. Success!

Except not so fast. Firstly, I was still getting a similar error:
```
closurePtrs: Cannot handle type TVar
and
closurePtrs: Cannot handle type TSO
```

> It seemed to not stop the measuring thread, and was also repeated. Looking back at the code for `heap_view_closurePtrs` it seems these closure types are not supported even in GHC 8.10. When it encounters them, `unpackClosure#` simply returns empty arrays, meaning that `recursiveSize` then just stops recursing and returns 0. I decided to ignore this error for now as there was a bigger issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It didn't seem to stop the measuring thread, and it was also repeated. Looking back at the code for `heap_view_closurePtrs` it seems these closure types are not supported even in GHC 8.10. When it encounters them, `unpackClosure#` simply returns empty arrays, meaning that `recursiveSize` then just stops recursing and returns 0. I decided to ignore this error for now as there was a bigger issue.
```

> It *appeared* that I was only getting an output 4-5 times after the start of the program. I assumed that some exception was stopping the thread that was performing the measurement. I was wrong. After an embarrassingly long time trying to find what could be throwing an exception, I realised: it wasn't stopping, it was simply taking so long that I never saw the output because I just killed the program. Setting a recursion depth limit (having the measurement function stop recursing after a certain number of steps) made it keep on producing output confirming this hypothesis.

Reviewer: 😂
